Despite ethylene’s simple structure, the ﬁeld of polyethylene is a complex one with a very wide range of types and many different manufacturing processes. From a comparatively late start, polyethylene production has increased rapidly to make polyethylene the major tonnage plastics material worldwide (45x106 t capacity in 1995). In the 1920s research into the polymerization of unsaturated compounds such as vinyl chloride, vinyl acetate, and styrene led to industrial processes being introduced in the 1930s, but the use of the same techniques with ethylene did not lead to high polymers. The chance observation in 1933 by an ICI research team that traces of a waxy polymer were formed when ethylene and benzaldehyde were subjected to a temperature of 170 C and a pressure of 190 MPa, led to the first patent in 1936 and small-scale production in 1939. The polymers made in this way, by using free radical initiators, were partially crystalline, and measurement of the density of the product was quickly established as a means of determining the crystallinity. Due to the side reactions occurring at the high temperatures employed, the polymer chains were branched, and densities of 915 – 925 kg/m3 were typically ob-tained. The densities of completely amorphous and completely crystalline polyethylene would be 880 and 1000 kg/m3, respectively.

During the 1950s three research groups working independently discovered three different catalysts which allowed the production of essentially linear polyethylene at low pressure and temperature. These polymers had densities in the region of 960 kg/m3, and became known as high-density polyethylene (HDPE), in contrast to the polymers produced by the extensively commercialized high-pressure process, which were named low-density polyethylene (LDPE). These discoveries laid the basis for the coordination catalysis of ethylene polymerization, which has continued to diversify. Of the three discoveries at Standard Oil (Indiana), Phillips Petroleum, and by KARL ZIEGLER at the Max-Planck-Institut fur Kohlenforschung, the latter two have been extensively commercialized. More recently the observation that traces of water can dramatically increase the polymerization rate of certain Ziegler catalysts has led to major developments in soluble coordination catalysts and later their supported variants.

The coordination catalysts allowed for the first time the copolymerizaton of ethylene with other olefins such as butene, which by introducing side branches reduces the crystallinity and allows a low-density polyethylene to be produced at comparatively low pressures. Although Du Pont of Canada introduced such a process in 1960, worldwide the products remained a small-volume specialty until 1978 when Union Carbide announced their Unipol process and coined the name linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE). In addition to developing a cheaper production process, Union Carbide introduced the concept of exploiting the different molecular structure of the linear product to make tougher film. Following this lead, LLDPE processes have been introduced by many other manufacturers.

The history of these discoveries is covered in [1–4, 20].

The three types of polyethylene outlined above account for the major part of polyethylene production (Table 1), but the picture is slightly confused since many plants have the capability of producing more than one type of product (so- called swing plants). Additionally, copolymers are made by both types of process. The free-radical process is used to produce copolymers of vinyl acetate, acrylates, methacrylates, and the corresponding acids, but chain transfer prevents the use of higher olefins because of the drastic reduction in molecular mass of the polymer. The coordination catalysts are able to copolymerize olefins, but are deactivated by more polar materials. Because of the complex interplay of the capabilities of modern plants, it is convenient to treat separately the products, the catalysts, and the processes.

2.3. High Molecular Mass (Bimodal)

Polyethylene (HMWPE)

This description is usually applied to HDPEs with MFIs in the range 0.01 – 0.1 by the normal test, although a higher load is usually used to characterize them. They are process-able with some difficulty on conventional PE processing machinery, although some advantages can be gained by using equipment optimized for these grades. In general, they are not simply higher molecular mass versions of normal HDPE grades, but are specially designed broad MMD polymers, often produced by using multiple reactors or combinations of catalysts [36]. The broad MMD, which may be bimodal, produces a highly shear dependent melt viscosity combined with good mechanical strength.

A particularly important type of bimodal polymer is produced by combining a high molecular mass component having a relatively high concentration of short branches with a low molecular mass component containing few or no branches. In this way the low molecular mass component crystallizes as folded chain lamellae and the high molecular mass component forms tie molecules which crystallize in several of the lamellae. This combination of branching and molecular mass is the reverse of what is usually observed in LLDPEs (see Sections 2.1 and 3.3.3), where the more highly branched components have low molecular masses. The desired bimodal distribution is achieved by careful process modifications using multiple reactors. The optimization of the tie molecules confers excellent resistance to long term crazing and crack growth [37], making the polymers particularly suitable for pipe and liquid containers.


2.4. Ultra High Molecular Mass Polyethylene (UHMWPE)

These polyethylenes were commercialized shortly after HDPE and have extremely high molecular mass (3 – 6 106 according to ASTM D4020), but do not usually have a broad molecular mass distribution. The viscosity is too high to be measured by the MFI test, and they are usually characterized either by the relative solution viscosity in decalin at 135 C, or by specially developed melt flow tests. The material is processed by techniques similar to those developed for PTFE, which involve fusing by sintering, rather than plastification to a true melt. UHMWPE has a remarkable combination of abrasion resistance, chemical inertness, low friction, toughness, and acceptability in contact with foodstuffs. Some properties are listed in Table 3. The density is only 940 kg/m3, even though the polymer is unbranched, because the extremely high viscosity hinders the crystallization process.

2.5. Properties of Ethylene Copolymers

Table 4 lists the principal types of ethylene copolymers which are in commercial production. Of these the vinyl acetate copolymers are produced in the largest quantities. All the ester and acid copolymers are produced by the high-pres-sure free-radical process, but most of the plants in the rapidly expanding LLDPE sector have the capability to produce VLDPE copolymers with higher content of a-olefin and this is an area with a large potential for expansion.

The principal effect of copolymerization is to reduce the crystallinity. The effect is approximately the same for all comonomers on a molar basis, with the exception of propene which can be incorporated into the crystal lattice. At room temperature the amorphous regions of the copolymer (where the comonomer groups are concentrated) are mobile and the effect of introducing a comonomer is to progressively reduce the stiffness (Fig. 9). In addition to the branches due to the comonomer, the branches which occur under the high pressure synthesis conditions also con-tribute to the reduction in crystallinity. Below room temperature there are differences between ester copolymers due to the differences in the glass transition temperature Tg of the amorphous material. This follows the Tg of the ester homo-polymer and results in EEA and EBA copolymers being flexible down to lower temperatures than EVA, with EMMA having the highest Tg. The VLDPEs produced by the LLDPE processes should have the best low-temperature properties, particularly in the case of narrow composition distribution polymers.
The methacrylic and acrylic acid copolymers are produced to provide enhanced adhesion, particularly in coextruded films or laminates. Not included in Table 4 are terpolymers in which acid monomers are used together with ester comonomers to improve adhesive properties.
The ionomers are produced by the partial neutralization of acidic copolymers containing 10 wt % of (meth)acrylic acid by sodium or zinc ions. The ionic salts and the unneutralized acid groups form strong interchain interactions, producing a form of thermally labile cross-linking in both the solid and the molten states [43, 44]. The Tg of the amorphous material in ionomers is slightly above room temperature, resulting in a stiffness similar to that of LDPE at room temperature. However, the stiffness of most ionomers decreases rapidly with increasing temperature above 40 C. The polyketone (PK) and cycloolefin (COC) copolymers are both recent developments in which ethylene is present as a 50 mol % alternating copolymer [45]. The PK materials are believed to be made with a novel group VIII catalyst [46]. They are targeted at medium stiffness applications and also have good barrier properties for hydrocarbons. The carbonyl group, however, makes the polymers susceptible to degradation by sunlight. The COC materials from Hoechst make use of the remarkable catalyst activity and copolymerization ability of the new single site catalysts [47] (Section 3.3.3) and the high transparency and low birefringence will allow its use in compact discs and transparent packaging.

