2.1. Molecular Structure and Morphology
LDPE has a random long-branching structure, with branches on branches. The short branches are not uniform in length but are mainly four or two carbon atoms long. The ethyl branches probably occur in pairs [21], and there may be some clustering of other branches [22]. The molecular mass distribution (MMD) is moderately broad.

LLDPE has branching of uniform length which is randomly distributed along a given chain, but there is a spread of average concentrations between chains, the highest concentrations of branches being generally in the shorter chains [23]. The catalysts used to minimize this effect generally also produce fairly narrow MMDs.

HDPE is essentially free of both long and short branching, although very small amounts may be deliberately incorporated to achieve specific product targets. The MMD depends on the catalyst type but is typically of medium width.

Polyethylene crystallizes in the form of plate-lets (lamellae) with a unit cell similar to that of low molecular mass paraffin waxes [24]. Due to chain folding, the molecular axes are oriented perpendicular to the longest dimension of the lamella and not parallel to it as might be expected (Fig. 2). The thickness of the lamellae is deter-mined by the crystallization conditions and the concentration of branches and is typically in the range of 8 – 20 nm. Thicker lamellae are associated with higher melting points and higher overall crystallinities. Slow cooling from the melt or annealing just below the melting point produces thicker lamellae. Where long mole-cules emerge from the lamella they may either loop back elsewhere into the same lamella or crystallize in one or more adjacent lamellae, thereby forming ‘‘tie molecules’’.

Thermodynamically the side branches are excluded from the crystalline region because their geometry is too different from that of the main chains to enter the crystalline lamellae. Therefore, the branches initiate chain folding, which results in thinner lamellae with the branches mainly situated on the chain folds on the surface of the lamellae. However, on rapid cooling these energetically preferred placements may not always occur, and some branches may become incorporated as crystal defects in the crystalline regions. Detailed measurements by solid-state NMR and Raman spectroscopy show that the categorization into crystalline and amorphous phases is too simplistic and a significant fraction of the polymer is present in the form of an ‘‘interfacial’’ fraction which has neither the freedom of motion of a liquid, nor the well-defined order of a crystal [25, 26]. A further result of a side branch is that having been prevented from folding directly into the same lamella, the polymer chain may form a tie molecule that links to one or more further lamellae.

Under moderately slow cooling conditions, crystallization may be nucleated at a compara-tively small number of sites. Crystallization then propagates outwards from these centers until the surfaces of the growing spheres meet. The resulting spherulites show a characteristic banded structure under a polarizing optical microscope. The typical milkiness of polyethylene is due to light scattered by spherulites or other, less well defined aggregates of crystallites, rather than by the crystallites themselves, which are much smaller than the wavelength of light [27]. Ethylene copolymers may be transparent, although partially crystalline.

2.2. General Properties

LDPE and LLDPE are translucent whitish solids and are fairly flexible. In the form of films they
have a limp feel and are transparent with only a slight milkiness. HDPE on the other hand is a
white opaque solid that is more rigid and forms films which have a more turbid appearance and a
crisp feel. Polyethylene does not dissolve in any solvent at room temperature, but dissolves readily in

aromatic and chlorinated hydrocarbons above its melting point. On cooling, the solutions tend to form gels which are difficult to filter. Although LDPE and LLDPE do not dissolve at room temperature, they may swell in certain solvents with a deterioration in mechanical strength. Manufacturers issue data sheets detailing the suitability of their products for use in contact with a wide range of materials. In addition to solvents, poly-ethylene is also susceptible to surface active agents which encourage the formation of cracks in stressed areas over prolonged periods of exposure. This phenomenon, known as environmental stress cracking (ESC), is believed to be due to lowering of the crack propagation energy. In general, HDPE is the preferred polyethylene for liquid containers.

Some properties of typical LDPE, HDPE, and LLDPE are listed in Table 2. Polyethylenes are routinely characterized by their density and melt flow index (MFI). The MFI test was originally chosen for LDPE to give a measure of the melt characteristics under conditions related to its processing. It is carried out by applying a standard force to a piston and measuring the rate of extrusion (in g/10 min) of the polyethylene through a standard die (Fig. 3). Other standard conditions are sometimes used on the same equipment to extend the range of information and because higher loads are sometimes considered more appropriate for HDPE. The short parallel section of the standard die introduces errors which mean that the MFI cannot be accurately related to viscosity (it would be an inverse relationship). For LDPE and HDPE, the MFI increases disproportionately with the applied load. The ratio of the two MFIs gives a measure of the ease of flow at high shear and is sometimes known as the flow ratio. The die swell ratio can also be measured in the MFI test and gives a measure of the elastic memory of the melt. This parameter correlates usefully with extrusion processes, where a low value is desirable for tubular film, and a high value is necessary for extrusion coating.

The behavior of polyethylene under shear is shown in Figure 4, which compares a LDPE and a LLDPE similar to those in Table 2. At sufficiently low shear rates the viscosity of all polyethylenes becomes Newtonian, i.e., independent of shear rate. Due to its narrow MMD the viscosity of the LLDPE is less shear dependent than that of the LDPE and has a higher viscosity under the higher shear conditions used in processing equipment. As indicated above, the crystalline properties are affected by the rate of cooling from the melt and the subsequent thermal history. For the purposes of reproducibility it is usual to apply a standard annealing treatment to test samples, such as annealing at 100 C for 5 min followed by slow cooling to room temperature. The crystallinity correlates with the density, reflecting the average properties of the polymer, but the melting point and the softening points for LLDPE are higher than for LDPE due to the presence of some relatively sparsely branched species in the for-mer type of polymer. In addition to the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) technique used to measure the fusion point, the relative heterogeneity of the LLDPEs is demonstrated even more clearly by temperature rise elution fractionation (TREF) [29, 30]. After depositing the sample by slow cooling from solution onto an inert support, elution is carried out over a programmed temperature range to measure the concentration of eluted polymer as a function of elution temperature. Examples are shown in Figure 5. LLDPE produced with a single-site catalyst (see Section 3.3.3) shows a single sharp peak by this test.

The weight-average and number-average molecular masses determined by size exclusion chromatography (SEC, also known as gel per-meation chromatography, GPC) are listed in Table 2, and Figure 6 shows their molecular mass distribution curves.

In the tensile test the yield strengths and the elastic moduli are as expected from the respective crystallinities. The higher rupture strength of the LLDPE relative to the LDPE is typical when the two polymers are chosen to have equal MFIs, but if the criterion were constant high-shear extrudability (e.g., the high load MFI) the tensile strengths would be very similar. The example chosen for the LLDPE is a butene copolymer. For higher performance applications longer chain olefins are used as comonomers [31]; e.g., octene (Du Pont, Dow), hexene (UCC, Exxon), 4-methylpentene (BP). These produce higher ten-sile strengths and impact energies, particularly in the form of film.

In common with other polymers, polyethylene is viscoelastic in the solid state. This means that the strain produced by applying a stress is time dependent, and in defining an elastic modulus it is important to specify the timescale of the measurement. Figure 7 shows the results of a measurement of strain versus time for a HDPE specimen at a constant tensile stress of 6.5 MPa [32]. The strain continues to increase approximately linearly with log t and after 4 d would have reached almost four times the value measured after 10 s. Thus the effective Young’s modulus after 4 d is only 25 % of the short-term value and after several years would be lower still. This creep behavior is particularly marked in the case of polyethylenes because the amorphous regions are relatively mobile at room temperature [33]. For design purposes the modulus must be estimated for the timescale and temperature expected for the application. A related problem in designing for long-term use is that a prolonged high stress may lead to crack formation and failure at a stress significantly below the conventionally measured yield stress [34].

The extremely low loss tangent (power factor) makes LDPE ideally suitable as an insulator for high-frequency cables. Since pure polyethylene contains no polar groups, a very low power factor is expected, and most of the measured value is due to traces of oxidation, catalyst residues, antioxidant, etc. Because they contain Ziegler or Phillips catalyst residues, such low power factors are not generally achievable with HDPE or LLDPE.

Figure 8 shows the permeability of LDPE and ethylene – vinyl acetate copolymer (EVA) films to oxygen and water vapor. Although LDPE has a very useful role as a packaging material, the gas and water vapor permeabilities are not particularly low compared to other film forming materials (see ! Films). Since permeation takes place in the mobile amorphous phase, the permeability of HDPE is appreciably lower.


Polyethylene is a high molecular mass hydro-carbon which can be considered as toxicologically inert, and indeed high-purity forms are used in medical prostheses. The suitability of a poly-ethylene for use in contact with food or in medical prostheses depends on its content of catalyst residues and principally on additives such as antioxidants. Acceptable limits on process residues and additives are normally con-trolled by national regulatory bodies, but in many cases they are based on the standards defined by the American Food and Drug Administration (FDA) or the German Bundesgesundheitsamt.
