3. Polymerization Chemistry

Heat of Reaction. The heat of polymerization of ethylene is 93.6 kJ/mol (3.34 kJ/g). Since the specific heat of ethylene is 2.08 J C 1 g 1, the temperature rise in the gas phase is ca. 16 C for each 1 % conversion to polymer. Heat removal is thus a key factor in a commercial polymerization process. Some processes (e.g., ICI autoclave, Unipol fluidized bed) employ only a limited conversion per pass, and the heat of reaction is absorbed by the cool reactants. The unreacted monomer is then cooled in the recycle stage. In other cases (e.g., UCC or BASF tubular and various slurry processes) more surface area or more residence time is provided, and heat is removed through the reactor walls.

3.2. Free-Radical Catalysis

3.2.1. Introduction

Free-radical catalysis is used exclusively in the high-pressure process, that is at pressures above 100 MPa. The reason for the use of such high pressures is a combination of historic, economic, and technical factors [39]. Because ethylene is gaseous above its critical temperature of 9 C, a pressure of ca. 20 MPa would be necessary in any case to achieve a reasonable concentration of monomer. Employing pressures of ca. 200 MPa and temperatures above 160 C enables the poly-ethylene produced to dissolve in the unreacted ethylene, and the high reaction rate makes the best use of the very expensive high-pressure equipment. 20 % conversion of the monomer is typically achieved in 40 s. A schematic phase diagram for an ethylene – polyethylene system is shown in Figure 10 [48]. For a more detailed account of the effect of molecular mass and MMD on the phase equilibria, see [49].

The single-phase ethylene – polyethylene mixture allows the reaction to take place as a classical free-radical-initiated solution polymer-ization (! Polymerization Processes, 2. Modeling of Processes and Reactors). Some aspects which are particularly important for ethylene systems are as follows:

1.In addition to the effect of concentrating the gaseous monomer, the pressure also influences the reaction rate constants, as is also the case for liquid systems subjected to high pressures [50]. This is generally considered in terms of a volume of activation, analogous to the energy of activation. High pressure affects the configuration change necessary for the reactants to reach the transition state. The overall contribution of the effect of pressure on the rate constants over the pressure range 0 to 200 MPa is to increase the polymerization rate by a factor of ca. 12 [51].

2.The reaction temperatures employed are also high, an average of ca. 220 C being typical. In parts of the reactor the temperature may be as low as 140 C but in other parts may reach over 300 C. These high temperatures also contribute to the high reaction rates, the activation energy being 32 kJ/mol.

3.The growing polymer chains are linear alkyl radicals and as such are very reactive not merely in the addition to double bonds, but also in abstracting hydrogen atoms from other molecules, thereby forming saturated alkyl chains and new radicals. The process is called chain transfer. Since these hydrogen atom abstraction reactions have higher activation energies than polymerization, they become increasingly important as the polymerization temperature rises. On the one hand they put stringent demands on the monomer purity to avoid traces of compounds which could give rise to chain transfer and thereby reduce the molecular mass, and on the other hand it is possible to use low concentrations of suitable materials (so-called chain-transfer agents or modifiers) to control the polymer molecular mass. Chain-transfer agents which have been used commercially include hydrogen, pro-pane, propene, acetone, and methyl ethyl ketone. Chain transfer to some compounds with very active hydrogen atoms such as propene, and particularly the higher alkenes, can lead to radicals which are insufficiently reactive towards ethylene to reinitiate new chains rapidly, and reduced reaction rates result.

4.Chain transfer can also occur with the poly-ethylene chains themselves, either to the same growing chain (intramolecular) or to other polyethylene chains (intermolecular transfer). These reactions create the characteristic structural features of LDPE which distinguish it from HDPE. As can be demonstrated with models, the most probable intramolecular chain-transfer reaction is to the carbon atom four carbons back down the chain, which produces butyl groups (Fig. 11 A). This so-called back-biting mechanism was first published by M. J. ROEDEL of Du Pont [52]. If, after the addition of one ethylene molecule to the newly formed secondary radical, a further back-bite occurs (Fig. 11 B), a pair of ethyl branches or a 2-ethylhexyl group is formed. A further possibility, shown in Figure 11 C, is that a back-bite occurs to a branch point, and the tertiary radical then decomposes into a new short radical, leaving a vinylidene group at the end of the polyethylene chain. This process is the principal chain-termination mechanism in LDPE, and concentrations of vinylidene groups approach one per number average molecule for LDPEs produced at high temperature. These three reactions account for the principal features observed in the infrared spectrum of LDPE, but to a lesser extent other intramolecular transfers also occur [9]. Since the activation energy for transfer is higher than for the polymerization reaction and the activation volume is smaller, branching and unsaturation increase with increasing polymerization temperature and decrease with increasing reaction pressure [53, 54].

5.Intermolecular transfer leads to long branching and broadening of the molecular mass distribution. Since they have more hydrogen atoms available for chain transfer, the long chains tend to be the most highly branched, and there may be branches on the branches. Statistically each new radical produced by initiation or chain-transfer reactions has a range of probabilities of growing to various lengths before being terminated by one of these same chain-transfer or radical combination reactions. The probable length is the same whether the chain grows from a new initiating radical or a branch point. Thus branches are statistically the same length as the backbone itself and, taking into account statistical var-iations, the branches may in some cases be longer than the initial backbone. Since the long-branching reaction is a chain-transfer mechanism, the average chain length of an unbranched molecule or a branch is shorter than it would be in the absence of the long-branching reaction. The effects of tempera-ture and pressure are similar to those for short branching, but additionally the amount of long branching is proportional to the concentration of dissolved polymer. In principle, this leads to a clear difference between plug flow (tubular) and continuous stirred-tank reactors, (CSTRs, autoclaves). Theoretical analyses have been presented for autoclave [55–57] and tubular [58] reactors.

6.Initiation is very similar to that in many other free-radical polymerizations, but there are some limitations. Initiators are commonly referred to as ‘‘catalysts’’. In the sense that one mole of initiator will achieve the polymerization of several thousand moles of ethylene this is so, but the initiator is destroyed in the process and so the term is, strictly speaking, incorrect. Oxygen was used as initiator in the early commercial processes because of the ease of introducing it into the process. With the development of high-pressure pumps and new initiators, modern plants are able to maintain more precise control of temperature profiles by the injection of solutions of liquid catalysts. The mechanism by which oxygen forms free radicals is rather complicated, and at lower temperatures oxygen can act as an inhibitor [59]. In the autoclave process the use of oxygen has been largely superseded, but in the tubular reactor process it is still widely used, sometimes in combination with liquid initiators. The two overall limitations on initiators are that they should be readily soluble in alkanes and they should produce reactive radicals, ideally alkyl or alkoxy radicals. On the former count, all the aqueous systems and most azo compounds are excluded, and on the second count dibenzoyl peroxide is unsuitable. The initiators are selected for use on the basis of their half-lifes at the reaction temperature. Since the residence time in the reactor zone may be of the order of 20 s or less, to obtain good control of the reaction rate, an initiator half-life of about 1 s is re-quired. For a tubular reactor the same initiator is active over a wider range of temperatures, but its selection is equally critical. Typical initiators are listed in Table 6 [60].

7.The mechanism of kinetic chain termination is by combination of radicals. This further widens the MMD in long-branched systems when the rate of inititation-combination is high [57].

8.Although the conversion of ethylene to poly-ethylene is thermodynamically favorable, the decomposition into carbon and a mixture of methane and hydrogen is also highly exothermic.
For kinetic reasons these reactions are only important at the high temperature and pressures of the high-pressure process. In a confined system the large amount of heat released can raise the temperature, and hence the pressure, of the methane and hydrogen to potentially dangerous levels. The theoretical final temperature and pressure for a contained decomposition starting at 250 C and 200 MPa are 1400 C and 620 MPa. In practice much of the heat would be absorbed by the walls of the vessel or pipework. High-pressure plants are designed with relief valves or bursting disks to protect the equipment from overpressurization due to decomposition. Decompositions usually start as a runaway polymerization reaction, but then they can propagate as a slow flame front even into cold gas. Experimental decompositions usually show low propagation velocities of ca. 0.2 m/s [61], but under the more turbulent conditions of com-mercial plant operation, propagation can be more rapid.
