
3.2.2. Copolymerization

High-pressure ethylene copolymerization follows the classical free-radical copolymerization mechanism. One of the most important characteristics are the reactivity ratios r1 and r2. 

The value of r1 can thus give guidance on the effectiveness of incorporation of comonomer relative to the feed concentration. Some measured values are shown in Table 7. A more comprehensive compilation is given in [9]. Vinyl acetate has a reactivity ratio of almost exactly 1.0 which means that the copolymer has the same composition as the reactor feed. Acrylates on the other hand have r1 much lower than 1 which means that the copolymer is much richer in acrylate than the reactant mixture. This has implications for the type of reactor. A continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR) operates with the comonomer concentrations in a dynamic equilibrium. To make a copolymer containing 20 wt % ethyl acrylate, the feed composition would contain typically 4 % of ethyl acrylate, but the reactor and the stream leaving the reactor would contain only 1.6 %. In the case of a continuous plug flow reactor (CPFR), corresponding to a tubular reactor or a laboratory batch reactor, the corresponding figures would be 3.1 and 0.7 %. The copolymer would in this case be a continuous blend of compositions ranging from 38 % to 9 % produced as the comonomer was used up progressively along the reactor. A useful feature of r1 for vinyl acetate being 1.0 (and r2 is also 1.0) is that values of reactivity ratios re-ported in the literature for other monomers co-polymerizing with vinyl acetate can be used to estimate the reactivity ratios for ethylene at high pressure [39]. This is illustrated in Table 7.

Comonomers also act as chain-transfer agents. Table 7 shows some practical measurements of these effects on the MFI under standard conditions. Reference [9] tabulates the chain-transfer effects in terms of molecular mass reduction. Clearly a moderate chain-transfer activity can be tolerated more readily for a comonomer with a low r1 since the concentration in the reactor will be lower. The chain-transfer activity of the higher a-olefins such as butene is very high, precluding their use in the free-radical process. The radicals produced by chain transfer are relatively stable and retard the reaction. Propene is less extreme in these effects and is sometimes used in the high-pressure process.

Copolymerization theory shows that if r2 is greater than 1 (it usually approximates to 1/r1), then the overall reaction rate is reduced. In a continuous process this translates to an increased initiator demand which in extreme cases makes the process inoperable. As indicated above for homopolymers, a high initiation rate broadens the MMD. Thus acrylate and methacrylate co-polymers require higher initiator injection rates and produce hazier films due to the wider MMD.


3.3. Coordination Catalysis

The three independent discoveries of low-pres-sure routes to linear polyethylene had one thing in common: they used catalysts containing transition metals. Despite their very different methods of preparation, there is general agreement that the basic mechanism of polymerization by these catalysts is the same. At some stage a s-bonded alkyl group is formed. Ethylene is coordinated to the transition metal by a p-bond. This then facilitates the insertion of the ethylene molecule into the metal – alkyl bond producing a longer chain alkyl and a vacant coordination site.

The direct insertion of ethylene into s-bond-ed aluminum alkyls was discovered by ZIEGLER in 1950, but the reaction was slow and did not lead to high polymers. The prior coordination of ethylene is clearly crucial. The active species in commercial catalysts is complex, but there is a very large worldwide activity in investigating coordination catalysts, usually by way of model compounds [16, 17]. Commercial catalysts are virtually all heterogeneous solids (at least on a microscopic scale) and require careful attention to the particle shape and size in the development of the manufacturing process. A feature of modern coordination catalysts (except those used in solution processes) is that the catalyst particles grow by a process of replication [13]. This means that the overall shape of each particle is maintained as it grows by polymerization, and thus the distribution of polymer particle sizes is related to the distribution of catalyst particle sizes. For this type of growth to occur, the polymerization process must break down the catalyst particles into much smaller entities which remain held together by the polymer formed, sometimes in the form of fibrils (Fig. 12). Electron microscopy has shown, for one type of supported catalyst at least, that the growth occurs in the form of cylinders, in the growing end of which a catalyst fragment is embedded[62]. This type of growth explains why polymerization rate does not decrease as the overall particle size increases, since the monomer diffusion path remains short. The active catalyst fragments range in size from about 4 nm for TiCl3 to 100 nm for oxide-supported catalysts.

By suitable technology, catalysts can be prepared so that replication leads to polymer parti-cles with a spherical shape and a diameter of mm, suitable for direct use without a pelletization step. Examples of this are the Phillips Particle Form and UCC’s Unipol processes based onsilica-supported catalysts, and the Montedison Group’s Spheripol catalyst based on MgCl2. Outside the United States there is considerable resistance by fabricators to the direct use of polymer powder, and much of the product is pelletized.

Not being simple isolated molecules, the active catalyst sites are not all identical and their activities and the average chain lengths which they produce vary. Instead of a simple statistical distribution of molecular mass, which would lead to a ratio of weight-average to number-average molecular mass of 2.0, appreciably broader MMDs are obtained
3.3.1. Phillips Catalysts

A typical Phillips catalyst is produced by impregnating silica particles with a solution of CrO3 to give a chromium content of ca. 1 %. The powder is then calcined in a current of air with increasing temperature to a final value of 800C. At this temperature all of the physically absorbed water and most of the surface hydroxyl groups are driven off [63] and the chromium is present as surface chromate. The formation of a surface silyl chromate is significant, because at the calcining temperature CrO3 would decompose to lower valent oxides. This catalyst, which is now moisture sensitive, will polymerize ethylene, but with an induction period. During the initial reaction with ethylene the catalyst’s color changes from orange to blue. This is believed to be due to the reduction to Cr2þ. The reduction can also be brought about by treatment with carbon monoxide, and in this case the catalyst reacts immediately with ethylene without an induction period.

The selection and treatment of the support is fundamental to the process, and a plant may use catalysts made from a variety of supports to produce the whole range of products. The optimum silica is claimed to have a high percentage


of pores with a pore diameter of 20 – 50 nm. A frequently used grade, Grace Davison 952, combines the required pore characteristics with a microspheroidal form. Where the spherical form is not necessary, other silicas are also used, made from crushed and graded silica gel with the required pore structure. The supports are normally supplied with the chromium already impregnated, leaving only the activation stage to be carried out at the polyethylene plant.

As a means of increasing the catalyst productivity and facilitating the production of lower molecular mass (higher MFI) polymers, treatment with titanium compounds is frequently used [64]. The resulting polymers have MFIs more suitable for many applications and also have somewhat broader MMDs. Molecular mass control is a problem with the Phillips process, since it is not possible to use a chain-transfer agent such as hydrogen, which is oxidized to water by the chromate groups and acts as a catalyst poison. Molecular mass control is therefore effected mainly by the choice and treatment of the support. The use of titanium compounds is believed to result in the chromium atoms being bound to the support via titanate bonds [65]. A further parameter available for modifying the surface characteristics is treatment with fluorine compounds which convert surface hydroxyl groups to fluoride and reduce the surface area. To some extent the effect is similar to high temperature calcination [65, 66].

Catalyst productivities are of the order of 5 kg PE per gram of catalyst [63] or higher, with a corresponding chromium content of 2 ppm or less. The percentage of chromium atoms which form active polymerization centers has been estimated as 12 % [67]. With a number-average chain length of the order of 1000 monomer units, each chromium atom thus produces about 1000 molecules. The chains are terminated by a b-hydrogen shift reaction:


The primary form of molecular mass (and hence MFI) control is by selection of a catalyst which favors the hydrogen shift reaction, but fine adjustments can be made by varying the reaction temperature, since a higher temperature favors the shift reaction.

There have been two developments of chromium catalysts by UCC which fall conceptually in the field of Phillips catalysts. CARRICK et al. reported that bis(triphenylsilyl) chromate, which is closely related to the proposed active site of a Phillips catalyst, polymerizes ethylene at high pressure.

1.When supported on silica it forms a very active catalyst for low-pressure polymerization

2.The second type of catalyst is formed by the reaction of chromium compounds having p-bond-ed ligands with the hydroxyl groups on silica [16, 17, 71, 72]. Paricularly favored is dicyclopenta-dienyl chromium (chromacene). Unlike the Phillips catalyst it is believed that the chromium is attached to the support by only one bond, with one bond remaining to a cyclopentadienyl group. A very useful feature of these catalysts is their sensitivity to hydrogen, which allows a wide range of molecular masses to be produced. The MMD produced is fairly narrow, but not as narrow as that from some of UCC’s Ziegler catalysts.

Somewhat similar to the Phillips catalyst is the Standard Oil (Indiana) catalyst which was the first of the coordination catalysts to be discovered. It typically consists of MoO3 supported on alumina or silica and calcined in air at high temperature. Unlike the Phillips catalyst it is necessary to reduce the precursor with hydrogen at elevated temperature before using in the polymerization reactor. Despite extensive develop-ment it has not been widely commercialized.
