3.3.2. Ziegler Catalysts

The range of catalysts which function by the Ziegler mechanism is extremely broad and it would be impossible to cover all the variants here. However, those catalysts which meet the requirements of modern polyethylene processes are more restricted in number and tend to follow a common pattern. Some of the developments in Ziegler catalysts for polyethylene have arisen out of developments for polypropylene (see ! Polypropylene, Chap. 1), but since ethylene has a higher reactivity and the extra parameter of stereoregularity does not have to be dealt with, the requirements of the polyethylene catalysts have generally been met more easily.

Early Ziegler catalysts for ethylene were based on b-TiCl3, produced by reducing TiCl4 with AlEt2Cl or Al2Et3Cl3 at low temperature. As cocatalyst, AlEt3 was used. The TiCl3 produced in this way contains 1/3 mole of cocrystallized AlCl3. Although the catalyst productivities were much higher than for propene, it was necessary to extract the catalyst residues in order to reduce the quantities of Ti and Cl in the product to acceptable levels. Later, by the use of longer chain aluminum alkyls as cocatalyst and alkoxytitanium chlorides as transition metal compound [74, 75], the catalyst productivity was improved sufficiently to allow the costly residue removal stages to be eliminated.

Kinetic studies have shown [17, 67] that only a small proportion of the titanium atoms in TiCl3 catalysts form active centers (typically < 1 %). This is believed to be due to the fact that, even with the small polymerizing particles, only a small fraction of the titanium atoms are at the crystallite surface. In order to make a higher proportion of the titanium atoms available to form active centers, various developments were made to support the transition metal compound on a carrier. Early attempts to support TiCl4 directly onto silica, alumina, or magnesia did not lead to a sufficient increase in productivity

1.The first useful high-yield catalyst used Mg (OH)Cl as support [76]. Since then a variety of magnesium compounds have been used successfully as supports [17, 74], but preeminent amongst these is MgCl2 or reaction mixtures which can produce this compound, at least on the support surface. Most modern Ziegler processes seem to use catalysts which fall into this category. The massive increase in activity of MgCl2 supported catalysts has been claimed to be due to an increase in the percentage of titanium atoms forming active centers (approaching 100 %) and not to a significant increase in reaction rate at the active center [16, 67]. The MgCl2 supported catalysts produce polyethylenes with narrower MMDs than unsupported catalysts [16] and a narrower distribution of composition in the case of LLDPEs. As with polypropylene, electron donors such as esters or THF may be employed to modify the characteristics of the MgCl2 based catalysts [16], but are not invariably used in the case of polyethylene. 
For some processes, particularly the fluidized-bed and loop reactors, the catalyst shape and size is very important, and procedures such as ball-milling and chemical reaction used to produce the basic catalysts do not lead to particle sizes and shapes suitable for direct use. Further processing is required to produce a defined particle size range. Spray-drying can be used to produce spherical paricles. UCC have filed patents on the use of the microspheroidal silicas used in the Phillips process for supporting MgCl2 – TiCl4 systems for their gas-phase process [77]. For solution processes, as small a particle size as possible is desirable, and this may be achieved either by the method of catalyst preparation [78] or by prepolymerization treatment with a higher olefin [79].

The molecular mass of polyethylene is normally controlled by the use of hydrogen. With Ziegler catalysts at 70 – 100 C this can require 20 mol % hydrogen in the gaseous phase of a slurry process or a gas-phase process. When other olefins are copolymerized with ethylene the concentration of hydrogen required is lower, due to chain transfer to the comonomer. At the high temperatures employed in the high-pressure process, the hydrogen concentrations used are much lower due to a relative acceleration of the rate of chain transfer to hydrogen and also a greater proportion of chain transfer by the b-shift reaction. Chain transfer to monomer or comonomer by the b-shift reaction results in unsaturation, primarily in the form of vinyl groups, but hydrogen chain transfer forms methyl-terminated chains.


3.3.3. Single-Site Catalysts (Metallocenes)

Typical Phillips or Ziegler catalysts do not follow classical polymerization kinetics and the resulting MMDs are substantially broader than the simple statistical case (see Section 3.3). For homopolymers this is probably an advantage and gives rise to the good processing characteristics of HDPE. In the case of copolymers this type of kinetic behavior leads to a broad distribution of composition, in which some chains have low comonomer concentrations and others high concentrations. For LLDPE there are advantages such as higher stiffness than LDPE of the same density, but disadvantages of higher extractable fractions and stickiness in the lower density versions. A catalyst which could produce a narrow composition distribution would overcome these disadvantages, and at the same time less of the expensive comonomer would be required for a given density reduction.

Catalysts which behave in a uniform manner to produce simple statistical distributions of molecular mass and composition have been known for many years, but they are low-yield systems and have not been commercialized for polyethylene [80]. Such catalysts, made from vanadium oxide trichloride [80] and bis(cyclopentadienyl) titanium dichloride [81], remain soluble in the presence of the cocatalyst.

In 1983 KAMINSKY described a catalyst which combined ideal MMD and composition distribution with high yield [82, 83]. A basic form of the catalyst was bis(cyclopentadienyl)dimethylzirconium with a massive excess of methyl alumi-noxane (CH3 – Al – O)n as cocatalyst. Al/Zr ratios as high as 10 000 or more are typically employed. Since then there has been intensive development in academia and industry with the objectives of improving the thermal stability of such catalysts, reducing the concentration of cocatalyst, and, above all, making supported versions.

Because the original catalysts were bis(cyclo-pentadienyl) transition metal compounds, known as metallocenes, there is a tendency to refer to these recent developments as ‘‘metallocene catalysts’’, but a more general term is ‘‘single-site catalysts’’. Given that metallocenes had previously been investigated as catalysts with conventional alkylaluminum compounds as cocatalysts [84], it could be said that the key discovery was the use of methyl aluminoxane (MAO) as cocatalyst. The latter is made by controlled hydrolysis of trimethylaluminum and has a rather ill-defined structure. To avoid too rapid a reaction leading to aluminum hydroxide and unreacted trimethyl, SINN et al. initially used the water of crystallization of materials such as copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate as the source of water [85]. Later developments have led to physical methods for the controlled hydrolysis and the material is commercially available.

Since the transition metal components of the catalysts are stable entities with well-defined structures, investigators have been able to make systematic changes to the structure and achieve 
the sort of control over the polymerization process which had been hoped for in the early days of Ziegler catalysis. Principal achievements include stereospecific polymerization (see ! Polypropylene), higher reactivity towards other olefins and also towards other monomers not industrially polymerizable by Ziegler catalysis. It is generally accepted that the active catalytic species is a transition metal cation associated with an aluminoxane counteranion [19, 20]. Some investigators believe that the function of the MAO is to act as a source of free trimethylaluminum and also to act as a receptor of the anion produced by the reaction between the catalyst and cocatalyst [86, 87]. Polymerization proceeds more rapidly in aromatic solvents and even more rapidly in chlorinated aromatic solvents, and this supports the view that a higher dielectric constant aids the formation of an optimal ion pair [87] (see formula below).

Both metallocene dichlorides and dimethyl forms of the catalysts are frequently described, but MAO transforms the former into methyl-substituted species. Chemical changes have been generally directed to modifying the ste-reochemical environment of the active center and include changes such as replacing the cyclopentadienyl groups with indenyl or fluor-enyl, alkyl substitution of the cyclopentadienyl rings, and linking two indenyl units to form a more rigid cage. Alkyl substituents can have a major effect on the catalyst activity [88]. Single-site catalysts have also been made which have only one cyclopentadienyl ligand [89]. Some general forms of single-site catalysts include:

The active sites are tetrahedrally coordinated, in contrast to heterogeneous Ziegler catalysts which are octahedrally coordinated in a TiCl3 or MgCl2 crystal lattice. In principle the greater openness of the tetrahedral configuration allows more ready access to bulkier monomers than the octahedral structure, but the ligands themselves are generally rather large. The improved incorporation of monomers larger than ethylene is generally only achieved by bridged systems, in which the opening angle can be greater than the 109 of a regular tetrahedron. Dow refer to their catalysts as ‘‘constrained geometry’’ catalysts and specify that they reduce the bond angles of the coordinated ligands to less than 109 , so that a greater solid angle is available for the entry of monomers to the free coordination site [90].

Developments in cocatalysts have been directed to reducing the ratio of cocatalyst to transition metal and developing better defined chemical entities as cocatalysts. Montell have shown that highly active aluminoxanes can be formed from trialkylaluminum compounds other than the methyl derivative, and that in some cases they are even more active than MAO [91]. When made from higher molar mass aluminum alkyls, well-defined cocatalyst compounds such as tetraalkyldialuminoxanes can be isolated.

The large excess of MAO found to be necessary to obtain optimum activity in many studies on metallocene catalysts may be due in part to moderately high molar concentration of the cocatalyst needed to generate the active centers. When catalyst and cocatalyst are pre-contacted at high concentrations and then diluted for polymerization, Al/Zr ratios as low as 20 can be effective [92]. Apart from aluminum-based cocatalysts, boron compounds have been used and allow much lower cocatalyst/ catalyst molar ratios to be achieved [93] (see formula above)

The general aspects of ethylene polymerization with metallocene catalysts are similar to those of Ziegler catalysis: molecular mass control can be effected by chain transfer to hydrogen; at higher temperatures chain transfer by the b-shift reaction produces vinyl groups; metallocene catalysts tend to be thermally labile and decompose to inactive species [87].

Industrially, the fact that the original metallocene catalysts were soluble meant that the immediate applications were in solution processes. Exxon took the view that the catalysts were short-lived and expensive and developed a high-pressure process to give a high catalyst yield [94, 95]. Product targets were VLDPEs with a lower content of extractables and less tackiness. Dow, which operates a solution process for HDPE and LLDPE, has developed high-temperature catalysts for producing a range of homopolymers and copolymers. They claim improved processability for these products due to incorporation of long branches by copolymerization of vinyl end groups of polymer chains formed by b-scission. The solution process favors end-group polymerization because the high temperature leads to formation of a high proportion of chain ends by b-scission; the polymer to monomer concentration ratio is high; and the catalyst is chosen to readily incorporate higher molecular mass olefin monomers. Other routes to improve the processability of the product include the use of mixed catalysts with different molar mass dependence on hydrogen concentration or temperature [96, 97].

For use in fluidized bed or slurry phase reactors, a supported catalyst is required. This has been achieved by many companies by treating a silica having the required particle size with MAO and then with the metallocene catalyst. The characteristics of narrow MMD etc. are maintained. In 1996 most major manufacturers are developing single-site catalyzed PEs, but the amount actually being sold is a very small fraction of PE sales. However, the catalysts can be used in all the major PE processes now using Phillips and Ziegler catalysts, and a changeover to single-site catalysts could occur comparatively quickly, depending on the advantages and disadvantages the new products present to plastics fabricators and end-users.
