
5.1.1. Autoclave Reactor

A typical autoclave design is shown in Figure 16. The autoclave volume is chosen to give an overall residence time of ca. 30 – 60 s, with corresponding volumes in larger plants of 1 m3. A novel feature is the internal stirrer motor. The Du Pont process uses an external motor. The elongated cylindrical form arises partly from the fabrication constraints of making a thick-walled forging, and partly from the requirements of the process for multiple zones. Cross-bores are provided along the length of the reactor for thermocouples, and monomer and initiator entries. Bursting disks or other relief devices are mounted directly into the reactor walls to provide unrestricted passage for the reactor contents in the event of a pressure rise due to a decomposition.

The autoclave functions as an adiabatic continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR), with the heat of reaction being removed by the fresh ethylene entering the reactor. The conversion of monomer to polymer is thus related to the difference in temperature between the feed gas and the final reaction temperature. For practical purposes percentage conversion ¼ 0.075 DT. Most modern reactors have two or more zones with increasing temperatures. The reaction temperatures are maintained constant by controlling the speeds of the pumps feeding initiators into the respective zones. The first zone is typically C and the final zone 290 C. For adequate control the initiators must have decomposition half-lifes of ca. 1 s under the reaction conditions in the zone. Table 6 lists a range of commercial initiators used in both the autoclave and tubular processes.

5.1.2. Tubular Reactor

A tubular reactor typically consists of several hundred meters of jacketted high-pressure tubing arranged as a series of straight sections connected by 180 bends. Inner diameters of 25 – 75 mm have been quoted, but 60 mm or somewhat larger is probably typical of modern tubular reactors. A ratio of outer to inner diameters of about 2.5 is used to provide the necessary strength for the high pressures involved. At many of the pipe junctions thermocouples are introduced to follow the course of the reaction, and initiator and gas inlets or pressure relief devices may also be incorporated. Unlike the autoclave process, no after-cooler is required for the secondary compressor, but the first section of the tubular reactor must function as a preheater to raise the ethylene to a sufficiently high temperature for the reaction to start. This temperature depends on the initiator employed, ranging from 190 C for oxygen to 140 C for a peroxydicarbonate. The latter part of the reactor functions as a product cooler similar to that of the autoclave process.

A tubular reactor works in the plug flow regime with heat transfer to the jacket. Plug flow is achieved by the correct choice of pipe diameter relative to the flow rate [106] so as to give sufficient turbulence and good axial mixing. Although heat is transferred through the reactor wall, it is not generally possible to maintain isothermal conditions, and temperature peaks occur. Because of the temperature peaks, which may not occur at exactly constant position in the tube, automatic temperature control must be more sophisticated than in the autoclave process; i.e., it must be possible to calculate average temperatures for appropriate regions of the reactor. When oxygen is used as initiator, the temperature control acts on the rate of addition of oxygen in the lower pressure part of the system. When peroxide initiators are used, the speeds of the high-pressure pumps are controlled. Oxygen is still widely used in the tubular reactor process, either alone or in conjunction with peroxides. Because of its complex initiation mechanism, oxygen tends to give more gentle temperature peaks with less tendency for decomposition. In the case of reactors with multiple initiator injection, liquid initiators offer more flexibility, since they can be injected at points where there is no fresh ethylene injection (which would be required to carry in oxygen as initiator). Injection of initiator at various positions along the tube produces new temperature peaks, increasing the overall conversion. By using these techniques higher conversions than in the autoclave reactor can be achieved, but at a higher cost in compression energy. Although conversions of up to 35 % (compared with 20 % for the autoclave) have been claimed, the maximum useful conversion depends on the product quality required, since quality deteriorates markedly with increasing conversion.


5.1.3. High-Pressure Copolymers

The high-pressure processes described are also suitable for the copolymerization of monomers such as vinyl acetate or acrylic esters. The autoclave process is generally preferred for its well-defined operating conditions and its ability to produce a useful conversion at a low maximum temperature. In the case of vinyl acetate the reactivities of the two monomers are virtually identical and so they are consumed at the same rate. This means that the reacting monomer mixture and the copolymer produced maintain a constant composition even in multizoned reactors, but the recycle system must handle high concentrations of vinyl acetate. The converse is the case for the acrylate esters. If a multizoned or a tubular reactor is used the composition varies in the different zones, but the recycle is nearly pure ethylene. The principal modifications to a high-pressure polyethylene plant to enable it to manufacture copolymers are:

1.Installation of liquid pumps, which usually pump the comonomer into the suction of the secondary compressor

2.In the case of vinyl acetate, it is necessary to collect the monomer which condenses in the low-pressure recycle system and purify it before returning it to the liquid pump.

3.The system for removing final traces of monomer must be improved, because the comonomers are more soluble than ethylene and they have more offensive odors.

Technically a copolymer plant could also copolymerize acrylic or methacrylic acid, but there are long-term corrosion problems. Major producers of these copolymers have constructed plants especially for their manufacture, using corrosion-resistant steels.


5.1.4. Linear Low-Density Polyethylene (LLDPE) catalysts give their highest yields at temperatures at which polyethylene is insoluble. The Phillips process on the other hand originated in the laboratory as a solution process that uses a fixed bed of catalyst [111] and was commercialized in 1956 as a solution process using a powdered catalyst which had to be removed by filtration. Laboratory developments led to the discovery of CdF Chimie converted high-pressure process high-activity catalysts which fragment at temperatures below 105  C to enable the low concentration of finely divided catalyst residues to be left in the product. Since 1961 all Phillips plants have been of this type using novel process technology to implement their Particle Form suspension process. Many companies have built plants to make polyethylene by using Ziegler catalysts, but because the license was only for the use of the catalyst, there has been a diversity of process even amongst the suspension processes. 

5.2. Suspension (Slurry) Process

The formation of polyethylene suspended in a hydrocarbon diluent was envisaged as a convenient form of production process from the earliest patenting by ZIEGLER [110]. This was reinforced by the fact that, for a given pressure, most Ziegler used in fluidized-bed reactors and Ziegler catalysts are being employed in loop reactors. Early Ziegler plants included a catalyst residue removal stage which added considerably to the complexity and cost. Since the late 1960s it has been possible to eliminate this step. Other variations arise from the selection of the diluent. A high-boiling diluent generally requires more energy to remove the final traces from the polymer, and stripping with steam is frequently employed. Because of the low flash point, the use of a low-boiling diluent such as hexane requires more care in the design and operation of the plant, but this seems to be the preferred route for modern plants.

The suspension process has been used extensively for the production of HDPE, and in many cases these polymers incorporate a small amount of comonomer to increase the toughness or resistance to stress cracking. The use of higher concentrations of comonomer to produce LLDPE presents problems however, as a significant fraction of the product dissolves in the diluent. Because of the poorer solvent properties of isobutane, the Phillips process is best suited to making lower density materials. With the original Phillips catalysts the lower density limit was considered to be about 930 kg/m3, but with more 
recent catalysts, particularly supported single-site catalysts, the limit is reduced to around 920 kg/m3.


5.2.1. Autoclave Process

Figure 17 shows a flowsheet for a suspension (slurry) process based on various descriptions of the Hoechst process [8, 74, 112, 113]. The pressure employed is between 0.5 and 1.0 MPa, allowing the use of large reactors (ca. 100 m3). The reaction temperature is 80 – 90 C. The diluent is a low-boiling hydrocarbon such as hexane. The catalyst compounds and aluminum alkyl are slurried with diluent in the catalyst mixing vessel before being fed to the reactor at a rate sufficient to maintain the required polymerization rate. Only one main reactor is shown but, at least in the case of bimodal MMD high molecular mass polymers [114], two or more reactors in cascade may be used. The reaction mixture is then passed to a run-down reactor where the dissolved ethylene is consumed almost completely, avoiding the need for an ethylene recycle. The slurry concentration is an important parameter in the process. A high concentration allows higher outputs from a given reactor volume, but the heat transfer to the cooling jacket is worse and stirring becomes more difficult. The maximum usable slurry concentration depends on a number of factors, including solvent type, particle size and shape, but principally on the bulk density of the polymer particles. Slurry concentrations vary from 15 to 45 wt % [115], with many patents reporting values in the range 30 –35 % in a heavy diluent.

The slurry from the run-down reactor then passes to a centrifuge to remove the bulk of the diluent, which is recycled directly to the reactor. This diluent contains aluminum alkyl and comonomer, if used, and the injection rates of these raw materials are adjusted to take into account the amounts reintroduced by the diluent recycle. The polymer is dried in a continuous fluidized-bed drier in a stream of hot nitrogen to remove residual diluent. Further quantities of diluent are condensed from the circulating nitrogen stream and recycled. Before extrusion into pellets, stabilizers are added to neutralize the catalyst residues, and other additives such as antioxidants may be added at this point.

The powder-fed extruder has a longer barrel than is the case for the high-pressure process because in addition to generating sufficient pressure for the pelletizing head, it must also melt the polymer powder. Although a single long barreled extruder is shown, new installations increasingly make use of a combination of a short extruder to melt the polymer followed by a gear pump to generate the pelletizing pressure. This combination has a lower energy requirement. 
