5.2.2. Loop Reactor Process

A simplified flowsheet for the Phillips Particle Form process is shown in Figure 18. The novel double loop reactor constructed from wide-bore jacketted pipe was developed by Phillips engineers to avoid deposits, which had been troublesome in a stirred autoclave [111, 116]. It also has a high surface-to-volume ratio, facilitating heat removal and allowing short residence times. The impeller forces the reaction mixture through the pipework in a turbulent regime with a velocity of 5 – 10 m/s. The reaction conditions of 100 C and 3 – 4 MPa correspond to the needs of the chromium-based Phillips catalyst and the required productivity. The diluent used is isobutane which facilitates the subsequent flash separation and, being a poor solvent for polyethylene, permits higher operating temperatures than the higher alkanes. The catalyst is flushed into the reactor with diluent from the metering device at the base of the catalyst slurry tank. The polymer is taken off from a sedimentation leg which enables the slurry to be passed to the flash tank at a concentration of 55 – 65 % instead of the 30 – 35 % circulating in the loop reactor [111]. The isobutane diluent evaporates in the flash tank and is then condensed and recycled. Residual isobutane is removed in a nitrogen-flushed conveyor. Pelletization is carried out in a powder-fed extruder in a similar way to the Hoechst process.



5.3. Gas-Phase Process

Fluidized-bed processes for the production of HDPE were developed in the late 1960s by Union Carbide and somewhat later by Naftachemie (now BP). Although an innovative technology, the process did not offer clear economic advantages over the established slurry processes (see Table 10). A rapid increase in the building of fluidized-bed plants followed Union Carbide’s announcement of their Unipol process for LLDPE in 1977. In this case the fluidized-bed process is competing with solution and high-pressure processes compared to which it has lower capital and operating costs, particularly if it can be assumed that customers are able to use ex-reactor granules directly (not assumed in Table 10). Many fluidized-bed units have been built as dual-purpose plants (‘‘swing plants’’) with the ability to produce either LLDPE or HDPE according to demand. The fluidized-bed process can produce a very wide range of MFIs and densities since it is free of the viscosity constraints of the solution process and the solubility constraints of the slurry process. Ranges of <0.01 to > 100 in MFI and densities from
890 to 970 kg/m3  have been claimed. Originally the process used butene as the comonomer for LLDPEs, but later hexene was introduced for high-performance copolymers. BP uses 4-methylpentene for its high-performance LLDPEs.

Figure 19 shows a flowsheet for the Union Carbide fluidized-bed process [119]. The reactor has a characteristic shape with a cylindrical reaction section, and an expanded section in which the gas velocity is reduced to allow entrained particles to fall back into the bed. The bed diameter is ca. 4 m with a working height of 10m and an overall height of the reaction unit of ca. 30 m. The gas enters the reactor through a distributor plate which provides an even distribution of gas and must also prevent powder falling through when the gas flow is stopped. The fluidized bed functions more or less as a continuous stirred-tank reactor in which mass transfer provides back mixing of material and heat throughout the reactor. There is a predominant upflow at the center and downflow at the walls. Reaction temperature is 80 – 100 C, depending on the density of the product being made, and the pressure is in the range of 0.7 – 2.0 MPa. Originally, lower pressures were used for butene and hexene to avoid condensation in the recycle cooler, but it is now claimed that condensation can be used to increase the output since the heat of vaporization of the liquid olefin absorbs more heat from the polymerizing particles [120]. The conversion per pass is ca. 2 % for HDPE, but higher when using an olefin comonomer in the condensing mode. The positioning of the catalyst feed point and the polymer offtake is important to minimize the loss of catalyst particles, which results in low conversion. A cyclone and/or filter prevent fine particles reaching the recycle cooler and compressor. The polymer is removed via a sequenced valve to a powder cyclone, from which residual monomers are recovered and recompressed. The main recycle compressor circulates gas at a high flow rate, but with a small pressure rise. Since the process operates close to the melting point of the polymer, accurate temperature control is necessary by regulating the rate of catalyst addition. If a runaway reaction is detected, a gas such as carbon dioxide can be injected to poison the catalyst.

The selection of the catalyst is critical for the success of the process. The catalyst particle grows by a process of replication to about 15 – 20 times its initial size. Not only does this affect the fluidization characteristics, but the polymerization rate and heat transfer must be controlled to prevent fusion of the particles or a thermal runaway reaction. Catalysts based on microspheroidal silica or MgCl2 with a mean particle size of about 50 mm are claimed to be particularly suitable [77].


5.4. Solution Process

Solution processes have been developed by various companies including Du Pont, Dow, DSM, and Mitsui for the manufacture of LLDPE or HDPE/LLDPE on a swing basis. The advantages are that they readily handle a wide range of comonomer types and product densities and, depending on catalyst type, tend to produce narrow MMD products more readily. Like the high-pressure process (which is also a solution process) they are unable to handle high-viscosity products. The Du Pont and DSM processes are similar to the high-pressure process in that they function adiabatically with short residence times, whereas the Dow and Mitsui processes remove heat from the reaction mixture. Since the Du Pont process is available under license and more plants of this type have been constructed, this is the process included in the table of cost estimates (Table 10) and described below. The Du Pont process has a catalyst residue removal stage and for this reason is probably not the most economic solution process.

Figure 20 shows a flowsheet of the Sclairtech process of Du Pont of Canada [121]. The ethylene is dissolved in a diluent such as cyclohexane and pumped to the reactor at ca. 10 MPa. The reaction step is adiabatic and the reaction temperature is in the range 200 – 300 C. The feed contains ca. 25 wt % ethylene, of which 95 % is converted to poylethylene in the reactor. The residence time is ca. 2 min. The catalyst most frequently quoted in patents is a mixture of VOCl3 and TiCl4 activated by an aluminum alkyl. Although the catalyst components may be initially soluble, the active catalyst species appears to be heterogeneous [80]. The polyethylene solution leaving the reactor is treated with a deactivating agent and the mixture then passes through a bed of alumina where the deactivated catalyst residues are adsorbed. Two depressurization stages follow, similar to the high-pressure process, in which solvent and unreacted monomers are volatilized. After extrusion into pellets, further removal of solvent residues is achieved by passing a heated stream of gas through the bed of pellets. 
