6.9. Joining Polyethylene

The most satisfactory method of joining PE is by welding but considerable experience is required to achieve satisfactory results. A widely used method uses a stream of hot gas (usually nitrogen to avoid oxidation) in a similar manner to gas welding of metals. The edges to be joined are chamfered to allow a bead of PE to be melted into the join. The heating causes changes in the annealed state of the PE adjacent to the join and it may become weaker than the original material, but this can be overcome by welding a reinforcing strip over the joint line [135]. 
Welding is used by the gas and water industries to join pipe in their distribution networks. The most satisfactory method is butt welding, in which the ends are machined true and then heated by a PTFE-insulated electrical heater. The automated machine then removes the heater and presses the ends together at a predetermined force. The procedure produces a bead of PE on the inside and outside surfaces, and the external bead is machined flush with the pipe surface.

Because of its low surface energy PE cannot be joined in its natural state by any of the strong adhesives such as epoxy resins. Rubbery adhesives such as pressure-sensitive and hot-melt adhesives function satisfactorily, but the mechanical strength of the bonding material is not very high. By treatment of the surface it is possible to form a bond with epoxies. A recommended method is oxidation with chromic acid, after which the surfaces can be glued with epoxy resin [135]. A recent development for bonding polyolefins is the use of an aliphatic amine primer that penetrates into the surface of the PE. When a cyanoacrylate adhesive is then applied, polymerization to form a bond occurs in the usual way [136].


7. Chemically Modified Polyethylenes

7.1. Cross-Linked Polyethylene

As noted in Section 3.2, polyethylene free radicals combine to form larger molecules, unlike materials such as polypropylene, which tends to degrade. This cross-linking reaction has been made use of in a number of ways to effectively increase the molecular mass with corresponding improvements in some properties. The principal commercial methods of cross-linking [137] are:

1.Free radicals can be generated by mixing in a peroxide such as dicumyl peroxide or ditert-butyl peroxide in an extruder at as low a temperature as possible and then curing the extruded cable in an external heated zone [138]. This process uses ca. 2 % peroxide and the curing process must be carried out under pressure to avoid excessive formation of voids. Peroxide together with a blowing agent is used for making foamed sheeting or molded articles, particularly of EVA.


2.Polyethylene can be cross-linked by radiation either above or below the melting point, but commercially, products are cross-linked in the solid state after the basic fabrication step. There are some differences in properties between peroxide and radiation cross-linked polyethylene due to the fact that in the solid state the cross-links occur in the existing amorphous regions, and the existing crystallinity is largely retained. Electron accelerators are used to provide the radiation in a readily controlled process [139]. Products include shrink tubing and sheeting, wire insulation, and water pipes.

3.Dow has developed a process (Sioplas-E) in which a peroxide is used to graft a vinylsilane to the polyethylene. The silane groups can then react together in the presence of moisture to form cross-links. A catalyst such as dibutyltin dilaurate is added to accelerate the cross-linking reaction. The process has the advantage that only a tenth of the amount of peroxide is required and the curing stage is simpler. However, since water must diffuse in from the surface, curing times become excessive for thick sections. The original process produced the graft polymer as a separate stage from the cable extrusion, but the Monosil process achieves the grafting in the cable extruder [140].

4.A further variant of silane cross-linking is the production of a silane copolymer by direct copolymerization of a vinylsilane in a high-pressure polyethylene reactor. This process developed by Mitsubishi for their Linklon-X polymers has been licensed to A. T. Plastics for their Aqualink process [141].


7.2. Chlorinated Polyethylene

Both LDPE and HDPE can be chlorinated to form what are in effect ethylene/vinyl chloride copolymers which are not accessible by direct polymerization. Chlorine contents of 34 – 44 wt % are reported [142]. By selection of the polyethylene and the chlorination conditions, products can be made with a range of processing viscosities and with the chlorination either randomly distributed or concentrated in segments, leaving some polyethylene crystallinity. The principal application is as a toughening agent for PVC, but there are other uses in the same general area as flexible materials such as EVA, but with the emphasis on outdoor weather resistance.

Du Pont manufacture a chlorosulfonated polyethylene (Hypalon) in which the sulfonyl groups are used in a propietary vulcanizing process. The materials are used as rubbers with good weathering properties.


7.3. Fluorinated Polyethylene

Fluorinated polyethylene is not produced as a bulk material, but surface treatment of articles with fluorine gas is used to produce a highly fluorinated surface layer. In this way the permeability of containers to a wide range of solvents can be reduced drastically. The treatment can be applied to finished articles, or fluorination can be carried out in-line by employing a dilute mixture of fluorine gas in nitrogen as the blow gas in the blow molding process [143]. Gasoline tanks are a major application, but the process is also used for containers for materials such as solvents and pesticides.


8. Environmental Aspects

8.1. Manufacture

Under normal operating conditions the impact on the environment of polyethylene production plants is minimal. There are some hydrocarbon emissions, particularly from those plants using solvents, but these are regulated by local legislation. In some cases hazardous materials such as the Phillips catalyst or aluminum alkyls are handled safely by attention to detail in the plant design and operation. The preparation of both peroxide initiators and Ziegler catalysts involves some extensive chemical operations with the attendant problems of waste disposal. All peroxide initiators are now made by specialist producers and there is also a tendency for this to be the case for Ziegler and Phillips catalysts.

The high-pressure autoclave process is protected against over-pressurization by bursting disks. When a disk bursts, the vessel contents, including carbonized polyethylene, are dis-charged quite safely to the atmosphere, but with the impression of an explosion. Thus, it is not feasible to site this type of plant as close to residential areas as would otherwise be possible.


8.2. Polymer Disposal and Recycling

At the time of writing (1997), much of the polyethylene produced is dumped into landfill within a few months of manufacture. This represents the fraction used in packaging. However, the use of disposable packaging is being increasingly called into question. In the 1970s and 1980s the concern was with the unsightliness of a material which was littering the environment, and did not degrade. Various schemes were developed to promote more rapid degradation based either on photosensitized oxidation [144] or biodegradation of blends with starch [145]. Some of these developments have reached commercialization, but now public opinion is moving towards the need to conserve plastics. Table 12 shows some of the options available to deal with the problem of disposable packaging.

Much emphasis centers on recycling, that is converting the polyethylene back into granules and then using it to produce more film etc. There is some oxidation during use and recovery, leading to some cross-linking and a slight

deterioration in extrusion properties. It will be difficult therefore to match the original manufacturer’s tightly controlled specification, particularly if the recovered material is of a variety of grades from different producers. There will also be a problem of suitability for use in contact with food, since the recovered material may contain a range of unknown organic and inorganic impurities. At present the intentions are to use recycled material in uncritical non-food uses. However, a successful recycling program could outstrip such uses. Ideally recycling should be at the monomer level, but polyethylene does not readily decompose to form ethylene.

Processes have been developed which crack the plastics waste to a liquid hydrocarbon suitable for use as the feedstock to a conventional cracker, which effectively allows recycling via the monomer [146]. In the BP process plastics waste is fed to a fluidized bed reactor maintained at about 500 C, and the liquid feedstock is recovered from the recirculating gas stream. Gaseous byproducts are used as fuel to maintain the temperature of the fluidized bed. This process has advantages over the hypothetical process of cracking PE to ethylene in that it tolerates the presence of other plastics materials, even PVC. The ever present problem of collection and transport is also eased in that the cracked feed-stock could be produced in relatively small local units and transported in tankers to the refineries.

Another approach is to burn the polyethylene to recover electrical or thermal energy, thereby saving on fossil fuel which in most economies is still being used for this purpose.

